# Cooling Calculation 

##  1.  Caluclating Power Consumption for each component:

   *	CPU – 84 Watt  (https://www.cpu-world.com/CPUs/Core_i5/Intel-Core%20i5-4590.html )
   *	GPU – 45Watt (https://www.techpowerup.com/gpu-specs/quadro-k620.c2600 )
   *	Single Board – it is not going to generate too much power. (It is not used)
   *	RAM – 3 Watt (https://uk.crucial.com/support/articles-faq-memory/how-much-power-does-memory-use#:~:text=As%20a%20rule%20of%20thumb,the%20voltage%20beyond%20XMP%20settings.)
   *	Power Supply – 132.50W
   *	SSD - 4 Watt (https://www.windowscentral.com/samsung-860-evo-review) 

##  2.	Sum up Power Consumption values for all components

      = Power Consumption (CPU + GPU + RAM + Power Supply + SSD)

      = (84 + 45 + 3 + 132.50 + 4) Watts

      = 268.50 Watt 

   Total Power Consumption for head Node is 268.50 Watt 

## 3. To Calculate Heat Dissipation in BTU/Hr:

   *NOTE: One BTU per hour is the energy needed to heat One Pound of Water to 1°F, for one hour*

   Multplying Total Power Consumption  *  3.4192  (https://www.se.com/uk/en/faqs/FA213115/#:~:text=To%20calculate%20heat%20dissipation%2C%20multiply,is%20equal%20to%20BTU%20%2F%20HR.)

      = 268.50 * 3.4192
      
      = Approx. 920 BTU/Hr

   Taking into consideration, that only head node is using GPU, the heat dissipation of compute node will be :

         = Power Consumption (CPU + RAM + Power Supply + SSD) * 3.4192

         = (84 + 3 + 132.50 + 4) * 3.4192

         = 223.5 * 3.4192

         = 764.2 BTU/hr

## 4 Requirement taken into Consideration while choosing the fan :

   * Size: Utilizing four fans of approximately 120mm, the standard dimension for case fans, is the chosen configuration.
   * Speed: should be more than 1000 RPM , so thatit can produce required airflow
   * Max Airflow:	At least. 35 CFM
   * Connector: Fans are selected to be compatible with the motherboard's fan headers, featuring a 4-pin connector.
   * Noise level: Priority is given to fans with a low noise level to guarantee quieter system operation.
  
## 5 Cooling Calculation:

   * Fan used in this project:
      
      Akasa 120mm LED Computer Fan with an airflow of approx. 59 CFM

   * Converting CFM(Cubic Feet Per Minute) to CMH (Cubic Meter Per Hour)
      
         1CFM = 1.699CMH

         59 CFM = 59 * 1.699 = 100.241 CMH

   * As we are using 4 fans, total CMH will be:

         = 4 * 102.241 CMH = 400.964 CMH.  
   
      Now lets see if the airflow provided by fan is sufficient to dissipate the heat generated by the system effectively. 

      * `Airflow (CMH) = Total Heat Dissipiation (BTU/hr) / (ΔT * 1.08)` where,
      `∆T = Change in Temperature`

      Typical change in temperature for this kind of system is 15 to 20⁰C , but as there are in-built fan present for CPU, GPU and Power supply, the change in temperature will be approx. 8 to 10 ⁰C. Therefore, Airflow needed to te system will be :

      * Required Airflow for head node(CMH) 
            
            = 920 / 10 * 1.08 
            = 85.18 CMH.

      * Required Airflow for compute node(CMH)
            
            = 764.2 / 10 * 1.08 (for head node)
            = 70.75 CMH.

      * Total Airflow required 
               
            = Airflow needed for head node + 4 * (Airflow needed for compute node)
             = 85.18 + 4 * 70.75 
             = 85.18 + 283.03
             = 368.04 CMH
  
      Therefore, the total airflow required in the system which is 360.04 CMH is less than air flow which is provided by the fan which is 400.964 CMH.

## 6. Examination

   A heat gun was employed to assess the heat dissipation of the entire system under two conditions: with the fan operational and with the fan deactivated. The result of testing is provided in Performance Evaluation Part.
